Stanford Startup Engineering - Class 6 - Thiel's Law


I. Origins, Rules, Culture

There are certain rules that you simply must follow when you start a business. A startup messed up at its foundation cannot be fixed. Beginnings of things are very important. "Founders and founding moments." Foundings are temporal, and perhaps they last as long as the company's technical innovation continues.

Get the early stuff as right as possible: high-trust people, good alignment structure. Everyone must be going in the same direction, and not by accident. Equity alignment: founders, angels, early employees, advisors all get equity. Everything must be aligned and _everything_ matters, which is why the founding teams are so crucial.


II. You Should Be a Delaware C-Corp

Setting up the company is one of the straightforward parts. Delaware C corps: legitimacy, basic structure, easy exits, and clear business law.


III. Ownership, Possession, Control

Always think about how things can get misaligned. Ownership is who owns the company (equity amounts). Possession is who operates the company day-to-day. Control is who exercises formal control over the company (board). Things can get messy here. The more people you add, the more complex things get. And things get considerably more complicated as investors are added to the mix.


IV. Founders and Employees

Achieve alignment between: Founders, employees, early investors. Equity is the classic alignment tool. CEO salary should be low, the lower it is the better the company tends to do. In the event of trouble a CEO would protect their high salary rather than fix the company. This creates an *equity-focused culture.* You do what's best for the company because that's what is best for everyone, including yourself.

Fully commit or don't even start. Part-time or other jobs or consultants are warning signs that people aren't in it for the long-term. People need to care. A lot. Think carefully and commit fully.

Equity should be given over time (4y, 25% at 1y cliff, then 1/48th each month for 3y).

*Never hire any consultants. They inherently mean bringing in people that are not committed. Everyone needs to be on board, rowing really hard in the same direction.*


V. Equity

Forms of equity: Common stock (number of shares - meaningless - percentage of firm ownership matters). Stock option (options become more valuable as the company becomes more valuable). Incentive stock options. Restricted stock.

The crucial takeaway is that most measures of equity are irrelevant. What matters is your share of the company. In practice, equity shares go down as you add more people.


VI. The Fundraising Process

Angel investors (>$1M worth and >$200k income) come first. They add experience, connections, and credibility. Angel Math Example: start with 2M shares for founders + 200k shares to Angel + 800k shares to 8 employees = 3M total shares (founders have 1/3 of the company). Convertible notes can be an alternative worth considering. Then VC Series A Round.


VII. Investor Protection

Devices to help protect VC investments, such as liquidation preferences. Investors tend to get their money back before anyone else does. As a rule, you should never have a down round. They result in everyone getting really mad and blaming everyone else.


VIII. More Investor Protection

Restrictions on sales are commonly used and early employees are limited from cashing out. But this aligns founders and VCs around the growth of a company's equity. There are a number of other concepts worth learning about, understanding, and negotiating.


IX. The Board

The board of directors is responsible for corporate governance. They are in charge, and their importance can't be overstated. Ideal board is simply one VC and two founders. If they are great people and aligned properly then the low number needed on the board is an advantage.


X. Planning for the Future

Building a company is a long journey. One key question to keep in mind is dilution as more people are added to the company. So this stresses the importance of making sure the best people are involved. Make sure you have the right people that you want and need on board.