CS183 Stanford Startup Engineering - Class 4 - The Last Mover Advantage

I. Escaping Competition

Capitalism is said to strive for perfect competition, but is actually the opposite. Competition is deeply-rooted in American culture and viewed in a very positive light. While it can be positive, we seem to forget that we're after genuine accomplishment, not unending competition.

Too often in the race to compete, we learn to confuse what is hard with what is valuable. At what point do we shift from competition towards monopoly? Fierce competition can be demoralizing (seeing people perform outside your current capacity). At worst competition is war and no one wins. But life might be more than war. Sometimes it's logical to run away.


II. Lies People Tell

The monopolies that do exist lie and say they are competing. People also lie about markets. Really big markets tend to be very competitive. Essentially, monopolies say they're in a huge market and non-monopolies always narrow their market. Market share can indicate this (Google as search company vs. Google as advertising company). Cash and margins are also a clear indicator (APPL $98B, MSFT $52B, GOOG $45B, AMZN $10B).

You have to keep running to stay ahead, but make it an easy jog rather than an intense sprint.


III. How To Own a Market

For a company to own its market, it must have some combination of brand, scale cost advantages, network effects, or proprietary technology. Brand means that people do not see products as interchangeable, they are not indifferent, and are willing to pay more. If you manage to build a brand, you build a monopoly. Scale advantages (WMT, AMZN). Network effects (lock in). Proprietary technology. APPL is a good example of all of these.


IV. Creating Your Market

Three Steps:
1. Find, create, or discover a new market.
2. Monopolize that market.
3. Expand that monopoly over time.

Choosing the Right Market: Small markets mean no customers, big markets are too competitive to make money. Find the "objective truth" of the market.

Monopoly and Scale: Start in a very small market. It's easy to be the best. Then expand. And be durable. Network effects set in. Barriers to entry rise. "The best kind of business is the one where you can tell a compelling story about the future." Find a small target market > become the best in the world at serving it > take over immediately adjacent markets > widen the aperture of what you're doing > capture more and more > combination of network effects, tech, scale, and brand > increase barrier to entry. "That is the recipe for building valuable business." Think about the future.

Examples: Amazon, eBay, LinkedIn, Twitter, Zynga, Groupon. All started with a small specific market and scaled up. The best way to fail is to start big and shrink.


V. Tech Frontiers

Rather than try for disruption, find a new frontier and go for it. Allegory: Pond, Lake, Ocean. The tech frontier is temporal. It's _when_ things are happening (trying to build a car company in the 1800s was too early, trying to build one of the big companies now is impossible). *The time to build the company is when the technology is being created. Not before or after.*

We think we should enter a tech industry early, but the best time may be much later than that, but also not too late. You want to make _the last great development_. Pick the right time > go long on tech > succeed > then short tech.

Some fields are very promising. But it's difficult to tell whether it's too early to jump in or where the field will be in 15 or 20 years. *The goal is to build companies that will still be around in 2020.*

Mobile internet may be a gold rush, but you probably want to be selling shovels instead of digging for gold, and APPL and GOOG are the ones selling the shovels. The market is just too big and too many companies are competing. You might find a valuable niche, but it will be difficult and it's worth being skeptical about.


VI. Frontiers and People

"Why should the 20th employee join your company?" You need to create some sort of monopoly business. Early businesses are driven by the quality of the people involved with them. There is competition for good employees. To attract the best people you need a compelling monopoly story. In terms of hiring, you simply can't compete with the great businesses without a compelling narrative. So what kind of people are you taking to the frontier?